jsonrpc blog post without dark theme (#1047)
deltachat/deltachat-pages: _posts/2025-02-07-why-jsonrpc-bindings-exist.md

While using the CFFI in android and iOS was working fine, in the desktop version which is based on electron it had some problems.

The main problem was that Electron is a full browser which uses multiple processes,
and you can't easily pass pointers to C-structs over process boundaries,
ignoring that this would a bad idea[^bad-idea].
On Android and iOS, you can just call Delta Chat core from the UI thread,
because this thread is in the same process the Delta Chat core library was linked to and not a completely different process like in electron.
So we ended up writing a JSON API on top of the Node.js NAPI bindings on top of the C bindings,
more about that below in the comparison.

[^bad-idea]: Why is passing memory pointers across process boundaries potentially dangerous?
    Two main reasons: you still need to free/cleanup the remote resource after using it
    and common tools will be unable to remind you of the need to do this, because they won't understand what you are doing.
    Another potential issue lies in implementation, if you just do the easy thing and pass raw memory locations as numbers,
    then congratulations, you just added a really big security issue,

>     since most exploits begin by accessing memory that they were not supposed to

Author: The LLM GPT 4o mini understands it, so I think it is fine unless you have a better idea to improve the sentence 🤷

<br />

#### Getting more information about errors than just the fact that an error occurred

As written above, you mostly get to know that and error happened but not what error.
So where do we get the error from?

- For [`dc_configure()`](https://c.delta.chat/classdc__context__t.html#adfe52669a5bed893df78a620566dd698),
you can listen for the [`DC_EVENT_CONFIGURE_PROGRESS`](https://c.delta.chat/group__DC__EVENT.html#gae047f9361d57c42d82a794324f5b9fd6) event,
if progress/`data1` is 0 then comment/`data2` contains the error message.
- For the other cases you can use [`dc_get_last_error()`](https://c.delta.chat/classdc__context__t.html#a84c9f09e57c2985fd1c47809eea01969)
to get the last error sting from the last error event - without possible races from waiting for or looping through events.
  - But if you do many operations from different threads there can still be races, at-least in theory.

#### How JSON-RPC solves these issues

There are two kinds of responses to a JSON-RPC requests:

> a response or an error, the error contains an error code and an error message string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a response or an error. An error contains an error code and an error message string.
```

```
--> {"jsonrpc": "2.0", "method": "foobar", "id": "1"}
<-- {"jsonrpc": "2.0", "error": {"code": -32601, "message": "Method not found"}, "id": "1"}
```

In Delta Chat we currently only use the error string.
Our JSON-RPC clients (JavaScript and Python) automatically convert these error responses to errors in the target language
and return/throw them:

<img src="../assets/blog/2024-11-10-why-jsonrpc-bindings-exist/error thrown in js.png" />

> So we always know what call an error belongs to, and we don't have the risk of mixing boolean return value and error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So we always know which call an error belongs to, and we don't have the risk of mixing up a boolean return value and error.
```

### Named fields in events

In the CFFI you have the following functions to get the data from events:

| Return Type | Call Signature                                                                                                                                                              |
| ----------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| int         | [dc_event_get_data1_int](https://c.delta.chat/classdc__event__t.html#a900f267609b9768610ecbb5f833ead0e) ([dc_event_t](https://c.delta.chat/classdc__event__t.html) \*event) |
| int         | [dc_event_get_data2_int](https://c.delta.chat/classdc__event__t.html#a189a61d211040263eb9c19582539c941) ([dc_event_t](https://c.delta.chat/classdc__event__t.html) \*event) |
| char \*     | [dc_event_get_data2_str](https://c.delta.chat/classdc__event__t.html#a65954ff569082bf7c2f2f3f1ea1ef401) ([dc_event_t](https://c.delta.chat/classdc__event__t.html) \*event) |

> To know what the `data1` and `data2` are about and if `data2` is a string or integer, you need to look at the event's documentation: <https://c.delta.chat/group__DC__EVENT.html>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To know what the `data1` and `data2` are about and if `data2` is a string or an integer, you need to look at the event's documentation: <https://c.delta.chat/group__DC__EVENT.html>
```

```c
/**
 * Emitted when SMTP connection is established and login was successful.
 *
 * @param data1 0
 * @param data2 (char*) Info string in English language.
 */
#define DC_EVENT_SMTP_CONNECTED           101
```

With the typescript bindings on the other hand, you get named and typed properties.

Examples of events in JSON-RPC:

```json
[
  {
    "kind": "SmtpMessageSent",
    "msg": "Message len=2402 was SMTP-sent to example@nine.testrun.org"
  },
  {
    "kind": "MsgDelivered",
    "chatId": 34,
    "msgId": 1342
  }
]
```

Usage in TypeScript:

```ts
dc.on("SmtpMessageSent", ({ msg }) => {
  console.log(msg);
});
dc.on("MsgDelivered", ({ chatId, msgId }) => {
  console.log(chatId, msgId);
});
```

This works very well with IDE auto-completion and "IntelliSense" (hover to get documentation).

### Async usage in Delta Chat desktop

As described in the [beginning](#why-implement-a-new-way),
before JSON-RPC we had issues with desktop getting unresponsive when there was a bit more API traffic,

> for example on fetching a lot of messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for example when fetching a lot of messages.
```

> While the CFFI is blocking, you never block on a single method call with JSON-RPC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the CFFI is blocking, with JSON-RPC you never block on a single method call
```

> since you just have one bidirectional stream of JSON-RPC messages.

Reviewer: It's not super clear how having a bidirectional stream makes it non-blocking.

Author: I'm not sure how to explain it better, we can still improve it later, I don't think this is a blocker

This really speed up desktop and made it more responsive.

### Easier to use than CFFI over process boundaries

> CFFI needs to be linked, which also means it will become part of the process that linked it,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CFFI needs to be linked, which also means it will become part of the process that linked it.
```

> JSON-RPC on the other hand requires no linking and is transport independent,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON-RPC on the other hand requires no linking and is transport-independent,
```

since it is just sending and receiving JSON objects.

> At the moment 3 transport implementations exist (Electron-IPC, stdio, Web Socket) and it is easy to create new ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment 3 transport implementations exist (Electron-IPC, stdio, WebSocket) and it is easy to create new ones.
```

> You could even use the new [webxdc realtime api](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/joinRealtimeChannel.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is even possible to use the new [webxdc realtime API](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/joinRealtimeChannel.html)
```

Otherwise it sounds like something you'd do normally.

to connect to a remote Delta Chat instance on another computer,
similar to the idea of implementing some remote desktop webxdc app.
The webxdc realtime API is also an interesting topic in of its own,
read its [announcement blog-post](./2024-11-17-webxdc-realtime) to learn more.

## Current Usage

Obviously we use this API in desktop,
but we already use it sometimes to add new APIs also on iOS, android and for writing bots.
We have no autogenerated wrapper/client for any language besides typescript yet,
so it is not as cool as it could be.
Though it is still easier to add new methods to JSON-RPC than to the CFFI,
especially where core returns complex struct with many fields:
In CFFI you would need to create a new opaque struct,

> accessor functions for the properties and an unref function and wrappers for those functions;
> in JSON-RPC you don't need all that, just write the rust struct & method and process the returned JSON in the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
accessor functions for the properties and an unref function and wrappers for those functions.
In JSON-RPC you don't need all that: just write the Rust struct & method and process the returned JSON in the client.
```

For this purpose, the CFFI API embeds the JSON-RPC API and provides both synchronous and asynchronous access to it[^jsonrpc_in_cffi].
(These APIs were also used in desktop before we switched to the stdio-rpc-server binary.

> See the graphic above in "The history of our JSON-RPC interface",
> we did this to provide a way to move in an incremental fashion instead of moving all methods at once)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the graphic above in "The history of our JSON-RPC interface".
We did this to provide a way to move in an incremental fashion instead of moving all methods at once)
```

[^jsonrpc_in_cffi]: JSON-RPC API in the CFFI: [`dc_jsonrpc_instance_t`](https://c.delta.chat/classdc__jsonrpc__instance__t.html)

## What's Next?

> Currently, we only have autogeneration for the typescript bindings,
> it would be great to also have autogenerated bindings for at least Swift, Java and Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, we only have autogeneration for the TypeScript bindings.
It would be great to also have autogenerated bindings for at least Swift, Java and Python.
```

Also, the documentation is still incomplete and the method naming in the Delta Chat JSON-RPC API is inconsistent in some places.

The code documentation part can easily be done by
copying the great documentation from the CFFI
and adapting it to fit to the JSON-RPC API

> (this is a good-first-issue, if you, dear reader, want to help;
> improving documentation is easy to get into and is always welcome).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(this is a good-first-issue. If you, dear reader, want to help,
improving documentation is easy to get into and is always welcome).
```

## Conclusion / TL;DR:

Our JSON-RPC API has the following benefits over our CFFI API:

- Reduces time to change the API, because you need to edit fewer files.
- Better, more robust error reporting
- Complete typescript client code generation helps to catch some bugs early during build time
- All methods are non-blocking, which allows for a very smooth user experience without UI freezes.

> - JSONRPC over stdio makes it easy to use from all kinds of programming languages without any complicated linking steps. (like NAPI or the JNI we need to use in the android app[^jni])

Reviewer: Some bullet points have a period, some don't.
